We all do what we believe in the moment will make us happiest.
Now sanctification is being so changed that you start trusting in God's way to make you happy.
God's prescription is a better doctor's prescription than the prescription laid out in Playboy magazine or on the TV or in Forbes magazine or anywhere else.
I've never met anyone who doesn't want to be happy.
We all do what we think will bring us joy.
It's just that we don't always trust that God knows how to get us there.
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, drawn from his book, The Pleasures of God, John Piper explains why the path to true happiness runs through the commands of God and why that's actually good news.
His teaching was originally delivered at Bethlehem Baptist Church on Wednesday evening, March 25th, 1992.
Luke 1146 is a wonderful verse to show the opposite of this easy yoke light, a burden Christ.
Woe to you teachers of the law.
You load men with burdens hard to bear.
and you yourselves do not touch the burdens with one of your fingers now what's he saying here he's saying there are Jewish teachers and Protestant teachers and Catholic teachers and teachers of the Bible law and they go around telling people what they ought to do do this do this do this do this and something's missing it's missing
In two ways, it's missing theologically, and it's usually missing personality-wise, and empathy-wise, and compassion-wise.
And what's missing is a little finger, or an arm, forearm, to help.
I mean, if you're gonna tell somebody not to lust, you just don't shake them and say, don't lust, no, and go out there and don't lust.
And nothing more, I mean,
That's what the teachers of the law were doing evidently.
They loaded men with burdens hard to bear.
Now Jesus, you read the Sermon on the Mount, he loaded us with a few burdens.
Don't commit adultery, don't lie, don't call anybody a fool, turn the other cheek, love your enemy.
Don't lay up treasures on earth, few burdens.
But his whole life
is meant to lift burdens.
His death is meant to lift burdens.
His love for the leopress and for the women and for the children and the sick and the harlots and the tax collectors is all meant to be burden lifting.
And the beatitudes that begin the Sermon on the Mount, blessed are the poor, blessed are the meek, blessed are the hungry, are meant to lift the burden.
And so when I, my job I think in this church,
is not to say the servant on the mount doesn't count.
Holiness doesn't count.
Purity doesn't count.
Honesty doesn't count.
Chastity doesn't count.
That's not my point.
That's not the way Grace talks.
My job is to say they do count and then to not only lift my finger but lift God's finger and say
If we had time to study the context of 1 John 5, 3, why is it that the burdens that the commandments of God are not burdensome?
And the answer is because to be born of God is to have the spirit of God and to have the spirit of God is to have God inside enabling, transforming, helping and more that we're going to talk about in a minute.
I looked up some 119 today and did my little word search on the word delight 10 times.
in Psalm 119, the longest chapter in the Bible.
10 times, the psalmist says, I delight in your commandments.
I delight in your testimonies.
I delight in your law.
I delight in your statutes.
I delight, I delight, I delight.
And you can imagine Schofield just turning in his grave.
You can't delight in those conditions.
That's legal, that's law.
delight in those awful things.
We're done with that.
What's this delight stuff in all that awful legalism?
Now Mark this, this is a another key, key, key insight.
Grace is both pardon and power.
That's not just a rhetorical flourish because I like peas.
It comes from 1 Corinthians 1510.
by the grace of God, Paul says, I am what I am.
Grace created a being here, and his grace toward me, so grace was a power coming toward me, did not prove vain, empty, fruitless.
But here's its fruit.
I labored harder than any of them.
Whoa, are you becoming a legalist, Paul?
No, it was not I.
but the grace of God which was with me.
I love that verse.
That verse solves so many problems for me.
Because what it shows is that grace is not just passing over sin, grace is empowering righteousness.
It moves in.
When Chaplain Evan Welch walked into my room when I was 20 years old in the fall of 19,
66 With the worst case of mononucleosis imaginable and tonsils big and yellow and in the hospital for three weeks Where God called me into the ministry?
He left and he turned I can just picture him there.
He's a little short man with a white flat top About 65 years old at that time.
He said John Have you got a favorite life verse?
And I'd never gotten a life verse before.
I'd never said this is my life verse.
But whether it was of the Lord or just was there, I said, I am crucified with Christ.
It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me.
And the life I now live in the flesh, I live by faith.
in the Son of God who loved me and gave Himself for me.
Now that, that verse has held me captive to think all these years.
It is not I, but Christ living through me, and the life I live is by faith in that Son.
That's the key to the Christian life.
Grace is God the Son, the Spirit,
the spirit of the sun, moving in on us, taking us over, replacing us as we die with Him in Christ, in the cross.
And we appropriate all that and live in the power of it by faith, resting in Him and believing His promises and His power for us.
What's the link?
in 2 Thessalonians 1, 11, and 12 between grace and obedience.
Grace moving in and obedience moving out.
What's the link?
Let me read these verses and point it out.
2 Thessalonians 1, 11.
To this end, we always pray for you that our God may make you worthy of His call.
Notice who's making us worthy.
and may fulfill, notice who's fulfilling, every good resolve and work of faith by his power.
See, there it is, work of faith.
Same thing in 1 Thessalonians 1-3.
I remember your labor of love, your work of faith, your endurance of hope, work of faith.
Hebrews 11, by faith, this and that.
So that,
The name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you and you and him according to the grace, there's grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Now that's a complex sentence.
Paul's mind was a complex mind.
We're stuck with it.
God chose Paul.
He knew what he was doing when he chose Paul to write 13 letters in the New Testament because reality is complex.
God fulfills every good resolve and turns it into a work of faith according to grace.
So my answer is the link between obedience coming out here and grace flowing in here is faith that turns this work into work of faith according to grace.
Grace, faith, work.
And that's not legalism.
That's not work.
That's obedience.
That's evangelical obedience, not legalism.
When grace moves in, faith appropriates and outcomes works of faith, or obedience to faith, as Paul calls it, I believe, elsewhere.
What verse shows that sanctification, the process of becoming holy, is a necessary part of salvation and comes about through faith.
2 Thessalonians 2.13 is the answer.
We were bound to give thanks to God always for you, brothers, beloved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning to be saved through sanctification by the Spirit and belief in the truth.
So there it is.
God chose you from the beginning.
He chose you to be saved, glorified, interheavened, inter-kingdom,
through, not through the wilderness of disobedience, but through sanctification.
The Spirit does it.
It's a light, burden, and an easy yoke.
And the way you appropriate it is by belief in the truth of how valuable everything is out there.
The truth is so beautiful and so valuable that if you really believe it, then the allurements of sin are gone.
They won't hook into you.
and drag you away and dominate you.
So in a nutshell, verse number 16, in a nutshell, why is it that saving faith produces obedience?
The answer is, when you trust Christ to take care of your future, the inevitable result is that sinful strategies to gain happiness sink in the peaceful confidence that God will make a better joy in his way.
Let me put that more simply.
Whenever you face two choices, you do what you believe will bring the greatest happiness to you at that moment.
I just believe that, that you're all hedonists at core because God made us that way.
We all do what we believe in the moment will make us happiest.
Now sanctification is being so changed that you start trusting in God's way to make you happy.
God's prescription is a better doctor's prescription than the prescription laid out in Playboy magazine or on the TV or in Forbes magazine or anywhere else.
God's prescription of happiness over here like give away your goods and if you have two coats give to him who has none and return good for evil and
That'll make you happier then, invest and don't give anything away and save and mount up for the future and, you know, get a lazy boy.
But if your mind is not being changed, if sanctification isn't happening, then you will believe this prescription.
I do not have a television because I know the limits of my credibility.
my credulousness.
I know that the seeds, the lying seeds, sewn every ten seconds just about, and the advertisements, I do not want to have to battle.
I got enough battles.
Then to battle, you see, I read the newspaper, so I know what's going on in the world, probably as well as anybody who watches television, and
I choose the newspaper because number one, the medium is not nearly as compelling.
And number two, I control what I look at.
If I say, I'm going to watch the news, and to watch the news, I have to watch about 10 ads, all of which appeal to greed or sex, then I don't get any choices.
Now, you may have this worked out some way that you flick it on and off and on and off, but
I know that I become a worldly person by watching television.
That's just a matter of fact.
Women are used.
They are used, used, used, used to sell everything.
I dislike that intensely, intensely, and I'm vulnerable to it intensely.
And then every other imaginable desire sewn in your teenager's hearts to want to buy everything under the sun are your kid's hearts.
Now all I'm saying is, that's an illustration of a prescription for happiness that's offered to you every day.
Here's a prescription for happiness.
Not one ad is based on the desire to make you unhappy.
Every ad appeals to your desire for happiness.
The Bible is also an ad for happiness.
It's weird, it's strange, it's utterly out of this world and the way it tells you to pursue it, but it is.
And it's an issue of faith.
So that's my answer to question number 16.
The way faith produces obedience is that every time an issue of obedience is on the table, you got two competing prescriptions for how to get there, maybe three or four.
One of them, or maybe more than one, is from God.
And the issue is, do you trust Him?
It takes time to learn to trust God with things as powerful as sex, I think.
I think I've learned it
pretty well.
I've got to be careful lest I fall, you know, let him who thinks that he stands take heed lest he fall.
But I would love to gather the men together.
And we do this every now and then and just talk about strategies that have been so wonderfully successful for me in just viciously slaying the thoughts that for maybe 10 years in my adolescent life, one out, one out,
as the prescription of happiness.
And now I know so much better.
I believe God so much more deeply than I believed in between the ages of 12 and 20.
And that's the issue.
Will you trust him with your money and the way the Bible says to use it to get happy?
I think we've
We've said about all, I need to say, I mean, we need to talk about this forever and we'll keep on talking about it as long as I'm alive.
The verse that maybe would sum it up would be John 635.
Jesus said to him to them, I am the bread of life.
He who comes to me shall not hunger and he who believes in me shall never thirst.
That's where I get my definition of faith that goes like this.
Faith is being satisfied
with all that God is for you in Christ.
Faith is being satisfied with all that God is for you in Christ.
So if Satan or the world or the television or the newspaper or your best friend offers you a pathway to happiness that is sinful, contrary to the will of God, the way to fight that is not with a kind of dutiful, oh no it's wrong,
wrong, wrong, wrong, that won't work in the long run.
You know, you can pull it off every now and then, but you just wear out after a while.
You gotta fight fire with fire, pleasure with pleasure.
I really believe God wants you to fight pleasure with pleasure.
And you have to say, all that God is for me in Jesus Christ is held out along this path of obedience.
To the degree that I leave this path of obedience, I lose
part of the most valuable, the most precious, the most pleasurable, life imaginable.
Now, that's a matter of faith.
Somebody may say, you're crazy if you think that.
You're crazy if you think going to church makes you happy.
You're the crazy if you think giving away 20% of your income makes you happy.
You're crazy if this or that or whatever.
I say, look, you may say I'm crazy, but God says I'm wise.
I wish I believe you or God.
That's the way you make progress in sanctification.
And that's the way you externalize the glory of God.
And when you live like that, when you win like that, when you choose a path of obedience because God is at the end, then he delights in it because God is most glorified in you when you are most satisfied in him.
And when you're satisfied in him, you walk in his paths because you know he'll satisfy you there.
even if they are incredibly painful paths.
You know, it says, I close with this, Peter said to Jesus, we've left everything and followed you.
What about us?
Mr. Sacrifice.
And Jesus says, Peter, nobody who has left father or mother
or wife or children or son or daughter or lands or houses.
For my sake in the Gospels she'll fail to receive back houses, lands, mothers and sisters and daughters with persecutions and in the end eternal life.
Now if you want to just carry the metaphor of the prescription and the medicine through
There are some side effects to the medicine.
They're called persecutions and sometimes they kill you.
But not a hair of your head will perish when you die and you'll go straight to glory and it's God's best plan for you and your happiness will be magnified forever.
Let's pray.
Father,
I love your gospel.
I love your law.
I love your spirit.
I love your prescription and your doctor heart and your father heart.
I love your little finger that is lifted to make the yoke easy and the burden light.
My prayer for myself and all these brothers and sisters
is that our hearts would be so filled with faith in all that you offer us in Christ as better than whatever sin offers, that we will walk with joy in paths of obedience and externalize your glory for this needy world to see and be saved by.
In Jesus' name, amen.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly and treasure Him truly.
I'm your host, Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, Jumpiper begins a five-part series titled, The Word That Reveals the Supremacy of God.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit desiringgod.org.